The term "Fixed Action Patterns" (FAP) in neuroscience and biology
originated with the ethologists Konrad Lorenz and Nikolaas Tinbergen
in the late 1930s. They introduced the concept as fundamental units of
innate, instinctive behavior in animals, describing FAPs as
predictable, stereotyped sequences of complex actions triggered by
specific external stimuli, or "sign stimuli." Lorenz is often credited
as the founder of the concept and identified several key
characteristics of FAPs, such as their stereotypy,
species-specificity, and automatic completion once triggered. This
concept was rooted in earlier classical stimulus-response models but
expanded to explain complex, species-characteristic behavior that is
genetically encoded and independent of learning or experience.


Rodolfo Llinás uses the term "Fixed Action Patterns" (FAPs) in the
context of motor acts that are automatic and pre-programmed sequences
of movement. He highlights FAPs as fundamental where thinking and
consciousness began, viewing active movement—or "motricity" as he
calls it—as the source and primary foundation of mental
life. According to Llinás, complex coordinated movements that animals
perform automatically (which they cannot consciously explain the
detailed muscle commands for) are examples of FAPs. He argues that the
evolution of the "I" or self-awareness arose from this central
planning and prediction of movement in animals. Thus, in Llinás's
neuroscience perspective, fixed action patterns link motor control
with the emergence of higher cognitive functions like thinking and
consciousness.

